start recording again. Um, okay.
Postage. Yes, that's right. At least
it's Yeah. So, I think it the view can
be customized, but at least you should
be able to see something. So um what I'm
going to cover now is sort of NPI
internals and this and the next lecture
sort of be cover both
um
sort of idea of how NPI works inside and
then um how that affects potentially the
performance you see and then also how
you can you can then use that
information to to hopefully um write
more efficient code have understanding a
bit more about how NPI works. Now these
are generic comments because of course
um I didn't write the NPI libraries open
NPI or NPICH2 or Intel NPI weren't
written by me but these are generic
comments I thought a good mental model
for how things go on in reality things
will probably be slightly different at a
low level and there will be other
optimizations but these are a reasonably
good mental model of a high level what
what what's going on inside I think the
main thing to stress for I start out now
is that NPI
um is a very old I mean NPI was defined
over 30 years ago. It's remarkable it's
still going and you if it were designed
today it would probably not be designed
the way it is now. Computing has changed
immensely. Um not least for example um
30 years ago all processors all
computers were single processors. you
had a single process there no shared
memory um and so um you ran single
threaded programs um and and that's not
true anymore so so some fundamental
design issues by NPI would be different
now if they were but this is you know
some of how NPI is implemented is
constrained by how it was defined back
then which was which was obviously done
well because it's still usable now but
you would probably do it differently if
you were starting out from scratch today
so um
okay I'll check
So I am recording these lectures and
they will appear on the website shortly
after the the So I'll talk briefly about
the NPI library structure. I'll focus
mostly on pointtooint because if you
understand pointtooint um that's
probably the the core of most um uh MPI
um programs send and receive. talk a bit
about and I actually won't talk about
single-sided um this is very little
there but really most of this this this
talk is about how pointto-point
communications works and it it's
slightly more um involved than you might
imagine um to get things working.
So um
NPI implementations are split into
modules. Um and actually there's quite a
um sorry
I meant
okay um I'm getting pop notifications on
email. I've closed that down. um the the
the NPI standard um has well it's it
grows but you know the core of the NPI
standard come with pointto-point
collectives uh and other bits and pieces
and and and so it's fairly a natural
decomposition
um so so so there will be you know if
you look if you downloaded an open
source MP implementation there will
probably be be be directories
corresponding to all of these um all of
these um areas um there may be uh hidden
internal modules And so one way of
thinking about you know how these um uh
implementations work is NPI is meant to
be um hardware agnostic. You could run
an NPI library. You can run an NPI
program on on almost any computer but
clearly at some level the NPI library
has to uh interface with the hardware.
There will be some hardware specific
stuff whether it's you know interfacing
to Ethernet or infinity band or doing
stuff over a shared memory or using the
uh the cray slingshot network
but a lot and then the way the NPI
libraries designed is vast amount of the
code is hardware independent so a lot
you know 99% of the lines of code are
hardware independent and there's a very
clean de division between um the the
hardware independent stuff and when it
starts become hardware dependent and and
and what is often done is you'll define
something like an ADI an abstract device
interface you will have a an abstract
model of of your networking your virtual
virtual model and you will you'll
basically the the main NPLI will only
call call these ADI calls and then to
port to a different hardware all you
have to do is all you have to do is to
port um the the stuff below this level
you have to you know basically how do I
actually send data from process A on
computer A to proc on computer one to
process B on computer two that will go
over as I said infinity band or or some
other network and that will have to be
implemented specifically but the the
model is there's this there's this very
low level outstat device interface
encapsulating the access network and to
port to new hardware you just have to to
port that very low level stuff and then
all the high level stuff comes comes for
free
so pointtooint is the core of most MP
implementations
um collectives. I mean, NPI was designed
um from the start for scientific and
technical computational science
applications. And so common operations
such as or reduce, broadcast, gather,
scatter were um were defined as they
were defined in the language in the
library, apologies, as collective calls.
They may be built from pointto-point
calls, they may not. um but often they
will be at least the default
implementation we use the pointtooint um
I'm not going to cover NPIO here but
basically um the NPIO library basically
builds on there's a standard
implementation called Romeo which builds
it just needs basic basic MP NPI calls
and so the large number of pointto-oint
calls exist we've already seen NPI is
send
all these things but they could often be
built from a simpler core set of
functions so so so there will be a core
set function doing very simple things
like sending n bytes of data from
process A to process B and the higher
level things like non-blocking
asynchronous buffered and other
operations will be built on top of that.
So I'll talk point to point. So I don't
want to sort of be a bit
bit naughty here. I think this is a
useful um uh model. How are we going to
characterize pointto-point performance?
We're going to send data from from from
um and we're actually going to run
immediately after the lunch time going
to run a simple ping pong code. How are
we going to interpret the results? Okay.
So I always think I mean I'm not a car
fanatic but I think cars are very useful
models for for computing and parallel
computing in particular. So you know
we've got analog car journey. Okay. My
car is part of nearby charity. It takes
five minutes to walk there. Okay. After
that I I average 60 km per hour when
driving.
How long does it take? Okay, so to do a
journey in minutes against the distance,
doesn't matter how far I go, it takes me
five minutes to walk to my car and then
the time is then linear in the in the
distance. Okay, five minutes then then
simple one that so these these these two
parameters will correspond when we do
message passing to the latency and then
this you will correspond to the
bandwidth. Okay.
Um if I plot this on a um on a log
scale, it looks a bit different. What
you see here is that for you know a
large for for small distances my my time
is constant at 5 minutes up to about a
kilometer or two and then it starts to
increase and log scale looks fairly
rapidly. But you know this you know you
can plot it different ways but be you
can see that you know anyway so that
this is this is how what I would see and
this is typically what we'd expect to
see for the time taking send a message
where this is the latency and this is um
sorry where this is the message size and
this is the the time taken.
So you get very different small and
large distance behavior for small
distances it takes a constant time of
five minutes. Okay. So what that's
saying is when we go to actual sending
messages in NPI small messages we'll
come back to what small mean will take a
constant time it will take the same
number of microsconds to send one bite
as to send 10 bytes basically
but long distances if I plot the speed
the speed against the distance achieve a
constant speed. So when I drive a long
distance I have the latency of five
minutes the overhead is is negligible I
achieve constant speed. So small
distances take constant time, long
distances achieve constant speed and and
in NPI terms, small distances will take
a constant latency of certain number of
microscs and long messages will achieve
a constant bandwidth asmtotically of
hopefully tens of gigabytes per second.
So I've talked about long and um um
small and large. What does that mean?
Well, a very useful measure is what he
got n and a half, but it takes equal
time as driving as walking. Okay. So, n
a half is um the the the speed times the
the latency. It's 5 kilometers. If I
travel 5 kilometers, okay, I spend equal
number of time getting to the car is
driving. So that so you'll see that this
the time against the distance starts to
change about five kilometers and then
much above five you get constant speed.
So this n when you say small message,
what do you mean? Well, this N and a
half where you spend equal amount of
time in in the overhead and it's
actually doing the transfer walking and
driving or latency and bandwidth gives
you a useful measure as to what where
the where the where the change in
behavior is likely to be. So for
pointto-point NPI latency is the
overhead for sending any message. The
time to get a very short message on the
network probably about microsconds and
in practice that's actually often
software overheads um rather than
hardware overheads.
Um the bandwidth is the rate of transfer
on the network. Here I assumed it's 10
gigabytes per second. So uh if I plot
the time taken to send a message against
the message size, it starts off always
at one microscond. That's fairly fairly
um generous assumption and then starts
to go up um or for large messages I
achieve a constant bandwidth of 10
gigabytes per second. Uh and the
crossover here and a half is 10
kilobytes. So you can see here that you
above. So I would say with these two
parameters of one microcond latency and
10 gigabytes per second of bandwidth
then 10 kilobytes would be my crossover
between small message and large message
behavior. Constant time versus constant
bandwidth.
So that's just a useful analogy.
NPI defines a lot of communication modes
probably too many. I mean when NPI was
defined they were trying to basically
encompass all the message passing
libraries which had which had um gone
before it for portability issues and uh
API defines multiple types of send but
the the the two definitely it it there
are two clear types of send one is
buffered and although very people very
rarely call this explicitly it's NPIB
send buffer send what happens is it's
like sending an email your buffer send
completes locally whether or not match
and receive have been posted. In other
words, when you make a buffered send,
it's like sending an email. You just
send it and then you just fire and
forget. However, it's called buffered
send because to do this fire and forget
model, MTA has to take a copy. They just
buffered somewhere until the receive is
posted. And the reason it's a bit
technical, but why people tend not to
use buffered sends is uh buffering send
fails if insufficient buffering space is
provided. It's obviously up to the user
to provide the buffering space. So if
you provide a megabyte of buffering
space and try and send 2 megabytes of
message, then NPI will fall over and
complain.
Um synchronous is like making a phone
call. Synchronous sends can only
complete when the matching receivers has
been posted. That in NPI is NPIS send.
And what that's like making a phone
call. You pick up the phone and you wait
on the phone until someone picks up at
the other end. You wait until the
receive is posted. And that um clearly
can lead to deadlock um um but um but
does not require any copying. Okay. So
you'd want to do that for large messages
where you might not want to to copy you
might not have room to copy the data
locally.
Um NPL ready send it it it's mad. Okay.
ready send a ready send which nobody
ever uses and I don't even mention it
anymore in my um introductory course um
is it requires there to have been um a
receive already posted
that's it's madness and you should never
use it um so it's only there for
historical reasons I think the what I
really want to constant here is standard
send okay so standard send is what most
people use NPI send and somewhat
strangely standard send can be either
buffered or synchronous
depending on the availability of buffer
space. And so so so so you might ask um
if I do standard send you you think I
can do I can do explicitly buffered
sends in NPI where NPI takes a copy of
the message returns control to me and
delivers the message sometime in the
future. I can do explicitly synchronous
sends where it's like making a phone
call. NPI synchronous send waits until
the receive is posted. There's no
explicit copying but does not return
control to me until the receive has been
posted in which case I could get
deadlock if the receive was never
posted.
The the obvious question is NPI is NPI
send standard send buffered or
synchronous? Well, you don't know. And
and the logic is let NPI decide. That's
the kind of formal logic. Don't tell NPI
whether to do synchronous send or
buffered send. Let it decide and what it
thinks is best. And what this allows NPI
to do in practice is that for small
messages, standard sends buffered. It
takes a copy and returns control to you.
For large messages, it is it is becomes
synchronous and it waits for it says
well I I'd like to be buffered basically
because that's nice. It means that the
the sender can get on uh doing other
stuff straight away. Uh but um maybe I
don't have enough buffer space and so if
I don't have enough buffer space, I
won't buffer the message. I will become
synchronous. I'll wait for the receipt
to be posted. So um so you should not
assume when you issue an MPI send okay
you should not assume that buffering
takes place but you should also not
assume that it doesn't take place you
should not assume that if when the
standard send returns you don't know if
the message has been received or not it
might not and this is NPI trying to be
helpful but it does cause a lot of
confusion
and so uh we'll come back to how that is
actually translate into what NPI does
under the hood. Another few things which
you may never have thought of but which
actually um um affect how NPI is
implemented. NPI requires ordering
message sent between two endpoints must
be non-overtaking.
um that actually is it's it's it's
interest you you never really think
about that but if NPI messages were not
ordered then it would be almost
impossible to write a correct program
because you'd send a message with some
data send another message which says uh
I'm finished and the I'm finished
message might overtake the Houston data
message. So um that actually is quite
important. Um we often don't think about
it. Fairness NPI does not guarantee
fairness. Fairness means for example if
I issue a receive from NPI any source it
will receive messages from equally from
all senders. Of course it might it might
preferentially always receive from from
rank zero. Um so okay so message times
help by ordering. So yet so in in older
message passing systems a message
because remember message ordering is not
guaranteed at the hardware level but
when you send a message over a modern
network it's been the package the
packets take different um routes and
reassemble at the other side and early
message passing liies often didn't
didn't enforce message ordering and so
people would tag the messages themselves
however I very rarely you very rarely
need tags and the reason you don't need
tags is because the messages are
ordered. So if you do if you do two
sends and two receives will match in the
order they were sent. So actually um you
you could use tags
but often you don't need to if you if
you know the messages are ordered. I'll
cover have an example like later on
maybe maybe illustrates that. But yes
tags can help the ordering but in
practice you often don't need them. If
you know them, if you if you understand
the messages are ordered, then you don't
need tags because you have a guarantee
of what order they they arrive in or or
what order they'll be received in
regards to the tag. Um
so um the buff the exercise we're going
to do after lunch will allow us to to to
to uh in will allow us to infer that it
can be configured u by there will be
some magic environment variable MPI
eager limit or it's probably about 10 k
10 kilobytes something like that
a few tens of kilobytes is sort of a
standard figure. Um it it can be
configured but not in a portable way.
There will be some magic there will be
some magic NPIC environment variable
which allows you to configure it. Um on
Archer 2 it's even more complicated
because um
the buffer size large messages are split
into lots of small messages which are
each individually buffered. So when you
have a buffer size of 10 kilobytes
actually messages of 100 kilobytes could
be buffered because it splits into 10
separate messages. It's slightly
confusing but about 10 kilobyt is about
I would guess a sort of standard figure
is that hell. Yeah.
Uh resource there should be a finite
level of the resources required to
process each message. That's why NPI
send cannot guarantee to buffer every
message because that would that that
would mean it would have to um be able
to to buffer an infinite number of
messages. uh progress. We'll come back
to this but outstanding communication
should be progressed where possible
and we'll come back to that but
basically it means that um oops yeah
I'll talk about progression here. So um
this is a slightly contrived it's a very
contrived example but what I'm doing is
is is is rank one okay is issuing a
non-blocking receive okay and then it
immediately goes into the barrier okay
so there is a receive set up so the
non-blocker says I'm expecting some data
from rank one okay please set up a
non-blocking receive then it goes into
the barrier rank zero then sends to one
with an NPIS end. So rank one is sitting
here in the barrier. Rank one is not
allowed to sit there in the barrier
saying I'm in a barrier. Rank one or MP
is is obliged to progress what it so
when you think rank one is in the bar.
It's not sitting in the barrier. It's
actually basically going well I'm in the
barrier but I better check. I've got
this outstanding non-blocking receiver.
I better check. So what it's doing is
it's not it's basically checking all the
time actively to see if there's any
incoming messages because it has to
progress them. It has to because if it
didn't progress descend from rank zero,
rank zero would never get to the barrier
and you would get a deadlock. So you
might think that when you call a barrier
it it sits in the right it doesn't what
it's doing is it's actively busy waiting
and checking for lots of stuff going on.
Oh there's an outgoing message I can
progress there's something coming in
there's stuff going on. So it's doing
lots and lots of stuff. So it's
basically doing a lot of stuff. Okay. So
of what NPI does is basically when you
call an NPI routine. The other thing I
should say is that NPI libraries are
typically single threaded. So you know
um you think of there being NPI being a
universal always active postmaster or
postmus delivering your data. Actually
it's not. The only time NPI can do
anything is when you call the library.
So when you call any NPI call like NPI
receive or NPI send the first thing it
does is it ignores what you've asked it
to do. It goes away and says right what
what stuff is going on? What do I need
to take care of? Okay. So it's like a
manual interrupt and again if NPI would
defined today it wouldn't be done it
wouldn't be done like that use multi-
threading but I'd have some example
later on but message progressing NPI has
to it can't just sit there wait in the
barrier it has to actively progress
things
um API both blocking and non-blocking
calls blocking calls say please send
this message and return to me when
you've done it non-blocking says send
this message sometime in the future
giving me back a handle a request which
allow me to say later on has the message
been delivered So actually low-level
network protocols is typically are
actually non-blocking. So actually um
the native thing for a network is
probably non-blocking and I said you
know when I say blocking when I do uh
when I say please send this message if I
do synchronous send in conceptually NPI
sitting there waiting for someone to
pick up the phone in practice it's
probably running around doing lots of
bookkeeping. It's it's it's slightly
subtle, but I think it's important to
understand that blocking and
non-blocking both exist. But it's
interesting point although we think with
blocking is the the is the the obvious
thing and non-blocking is slightly
complicated at the network level most
networks natively use non-blocking calls
to allow them to do lots of things at
once.
I've lost my cursor. So, uh,
pointto-point example, um, you know, if
I, um, if I'm doing, um, if I'm doing,
um,
uh, a halo swapping, okay, I want to
receive data from my up neighbor,
receive data from my down neighbor, send
to my down neighbor, and send to my up
neighbor. I want to do a send and a
receive. The problem with NPI is if I
did NPI receive here, okay, then this
would deadlock because it would be then
then because everyone would be sitting
in the receive and nobody would get to
the send. Okay, that's the problem about
about blocking calls. If everybody calls
the receive first and not and if you
want to do the receive first, if
everyone calls the receive, everyone's
sitting in the receive saying where's
the send but nobody's going to the send.
Okay, you get this catch 22. So that's
where you use non-blocking. You say
please I'm expecting some me some data
from my up neighbor. I'm expecting some
data from my down neighbor. Okay. But
basically return control to me issue a
non-blocking call where I I I I get a
reference to this to this communication
in this request which is like a ticket.
And then I can do the sends down and up.
Whoops. Sorry. Which match. And then I
have to wait for these to complete. So
this this means that I know at this
point that my send has gone down and my
send has gone up. I don't know if I this
data has been received. So I have to
wait on these to complete. And it's
that's why you use non-blocking. It's to
avoid deadlock. Coming back to what Mark
said about ordering,
you might worry that um
that um if if you are um if you're
running this on say two processes,
your up and your down neighbor are the
same process. Okay, so you're saying I
want to receive two messages. So
building on rank zero and rank one and
I've got cyclic boundary conditions. My
up neighbor, if I'm rank zero, my up
neighbor, my down neighbor are both rank
one. Okay, so I'm receiving two messages
from rank one. Okay, and sending two
messages to rank one. How do I make sure
that the correct receive matches the
correct send? Well, I could use tags,
but actually if I order them then this
because the first receive I choose from
my up neighbor, okay, as a receive from
my up neighbor, my first send is to the
down neighbor. And so, because I've
carefully ordered these, this code will
always work. If I hadn't carefully
ordered them, it could potentially have
gone wrong on small numbers of processes
where my up and down neighbor are the
same. And in that case, I could have
used tags. But you don't have to use
tags if you understand how message
matching works. So it's important that
that send down
is guaranteed to match that receive up
because that receiver was posted first.
So even if the down neighbor and the up
neighbor are the same then this code
will work. That's a slight subtlety and
the main reason here is is to show why
you use non-blocking communications.
Um NPI also has persistent
communications. It's a bit strange in
NPI that
um every time you call it if you do halo
swapping you're calling an MPI send of a
particular buffer to a the parameters to
your send are the same and you call it
millions of times. Okay. Um so MPI
um also defines persistent
communications where you say here's an
operation I want to do lots of times. So
you initiate it and then you say do that
operation. Um, in practice that doesn't
help much because for point-to-point
communication the overhead of of
processing the argument list is pretty
small. Uh, for collectives there's a lot
more that can be done. Okay, if you call
an or reduce there's 101 different
algorithms that MPI could use to do that
and which is the most efficient will
depend on how many processes you're
running in how big the buffer sizes are
and so
persistent collectives are now a part of
MPI. Um but they have actually been
persistent operations have been a part I
have an example later on have been a
part of NPI for many years but they
weren't much use persistent claims are
in principle very useful because they
allow NPI to say David wants to do by by
saying you're doing something you're
saying NPI I'm going to do this lots and
lots of times to NPI could then say well
it's worth me going away and trying up
50 different ways and working out what
the best way is
and the way that persistent works is you
don't do NPI I'll receive NPI I receive
NPI send NPI send you say um NPI receive
in it you're saying I am going to want
to do this operation in the future I'm
going to want to do this in the future
and these requests then so this doesn't
do the send and the receive it just says
I want going to want to do these with
all these arguments these buffers and
these counts and these data types in the
future you get back these requests which
refer to these and then you do npi start
all this says start them
So again, for pointto-point, it's
probably not worth the effort, but for
for for collectors, it may be worth the
effort. There is a slight
um
caveat here that that that the order of
persistent calls is not guaranteed. So
when you start all can start them in any
order. That means to get correct message
matching, you have to use tags. It's a
bit of a um but persistent calls I mean
they're not commonly used but they may
be useful if you're doing lots of
collectives. It depends on the quality
of the implementation.
Uh we've talked about derived data
types. Um
in most most implementations the very
low level abstract device interface
calls are just allow you to send a
certain block of bytes from A to B. So
the way the derived data types work is
NPI does actually do actually does do an
explicit copy. Um you can argue whether
might be someone's asked this question
already is it quicker to do the copy
yourself with that force array syntax.
It might be um
I still think derived data are very
useful for elegance and they should be
implemented reasonably reasonably
efficiently but it is worth realizing
there's not really any magic going on
low level. is probably copying the data
into a continuous buffer, sending it and
then and unpacking. It's doing a it's
doing a pack send, unpack, copy in,
send, copy out um mechanism.
But I want the most important part of
this lecture is is really how does how
does NPI work at the lowest level?
Um how does NPI actually send data from
one process to another? And so what will
happen is that um when you try and send
data okay um um you MPI needs a methods
for delivering packets of data to remote
processes. They might be your message
but in practice they might be a protocol
message. What this means is when you if
you want to send a message to another
process what might actually happen is
that NPI sends a little header saying
there's a there's a message incoming.
Okay. uh and then then you will just get
that will just notify you there's a
message that there's a message waiting
they may get back and get the data later
okay so uh um so whenever a process
sends an NPI message to remote process
what happens is a good model it sends an
initial protocol message okay now it may
contain some data but it may also just
be so so so your your your your your
go-to model is a process an NPI process
wants to send data to another process
What it does, it actually just sends a
little header message of maybe 128 to
256 bytes saying, "I've got some data
for you. Come back to me and and receive
it when you're ready." So, do you mean
PVM? Do you mean the the pack unpacked
um Mark or the protocol stuff? So, yes,
PVM was explicit pack unpack model.
Yeah, I'm thinking of the days before 94
before MPI, I think.
Yeah, we had to send
Yeah. But luckily the data types is done
inevitably for you. Yeah. Um so many
implementations use a fixed size header
for all message. What this means is
whenever you send data to another
process what will be sent will be a
small header message 128 bytes of data
and there'll be enough field for the
envelope. You know okay there's a
message waiting from this guy and it
contains this amount of mark. Obviously,
if your message is really small, it
might be able to fit the data on the
protocol message as well. That's not but
that that's your model. You your go-to
model should be when I send data um uh
uh when I send a message to NPI, what's
sent is a little header, a little
protocol message saying there's some
data over here for you. Come and receive
it when you're ready.
Whoops. Sorry.
So um so if the receiving process
already has a matching receive then it
can actually go back and say okay I want
to receive the data I know want I know
where I know where to put it. If the
receive hasn't been issued what it has
to do is it has to it has to park that
message and basically put it somewhere
and say well I' I've got a send from
this guy but I don't have a matching
receive yet. Okay, so that tells you
immediately that wherever possible, you
should post receives before the sends.
It's a lot less work for NPI if the
receive exists because when the set when
the send comes in, it can match it
immediately. Otherwise, it has to say,
well, there's a send coming in, but I
don't know what to do with it because I
don't have a receive. It has to park it
somewhere and process it later on.
Um, also, um, if you do a receive, yeah,
when you do a receive call, the first
thing you do is say, well, I want to
receive data, but maybe I've already had
a ping from somebody. You look for it.
Okay. Um so again um in practice there
could be lots of different cues but in
practice uh NPI tends to have a single
global queue. So MPI starts to basically
struggle if you have lots and lots and
lots of outstanding messages which
aren't being received. Okay. Because
every time it looks like there's a huge
queue of messages I have to look
through. Okay. That's sort of a
um so how does NPI actually deliver the
message? Well, the um the two most basic
ways are eager and rendevous and these
map quite nicely onto the thresholds of
MPI send being buffered or or or or or
synchronous. Okay. So, um I'll talk
about these. So, so the the eager
protocol and there's the rendevu
protocol. There's lots of various these
but if you understand these you got some
basic model for how things go on under
the hood. So the eager protocol okay the
initial protocol contains the full data
for the corresponding MPI message. Okay.
So what when you want to send data you
basically send all the data you send the
header message and you send the data all
the way off the remote process. Okay. So
um if there's no match you receive the
data must be buffered at the receiver.
So this is what you'd like to do when
you do NPI send. what you'd like NPI
send to do is to is is to copy the data
over to the remote process, get back to
you and then carry on. However, that
requires there to be storage space at
the remote process. And so that's why
this can only be done for relatively
small. So what the what what what what
NPA does, it reserves space for incoming
messages up to a certain size. So when
you send small messages, they will be
delivered immediately because you know
there is enough buffer space on the
other side to send it straight over.
Okay.
So um uh eager sends can complete as
soon as initial proto has been set. That
that means if you what it's saying is if
you do an NPI send with a small message
size NPI say that's a small message I'll
copy the data over to the remote process
come back and the send completes. Okay.
Um
okay.
Um, so I'll come back to how MPI COM
interact with the cues. Um,
it basically matches them. So, so I do
so as you could have a different queue
for each um for each communicator, but
NPI tends not to um tends to have a
single global queue. I'll come back to
the end. Uh, I don't think it will help
make it more efficient. um in principle
it would because you only have to check
for messages in that communicator but in
practice I don't think that's what's
done. I'll come back to that. Um
so the eager protocol requires buffering
the receiving process it requires the
receiver to have the data already um
allocated but that means that you know
because NPI is only allowed to take up a
finite amount of memory um then there
has to be a limit on you can think I
will do eager protocol up to 10
kilobytes but not beyond and ready
messages I'm not going to talk about
so the rendevu protocol is kind of the
is the most um is the most
general but resource intensive. What
happens is uh in the rendev protocol
when you send the initial protocol
message it only contains the envelope
information. So if you got send a
gigabyte of data what NPI does is says
well I will actually just send a little
header. So I'll tell the other guy I've
got data for you. Okay so that that
that's it's called a run because you
send an initial message. Okay. Then when
um the receiver is supposed to receive
it notices that and then it gets back to
you and says yes I'm ready for the data
and then it's sent. So the eager
protocol is fast because it's fire and
forget it's one copy. The Ron EV
protocol which you have to use for big
messages is is is slower. You send the
protocol message then the guy gets back
to say I'm ready. Then you send the
data. So it's there back and there
again. Okay. So it's a rendevous because
there's a a handshake. Okay.
So um um
it for large messages after the
rendevous can't be faster because so so
this is you might so so basically you
when you call NPI send you're just
telling NPI look please deliver this
message in the most efficient way and
NPI would decide whether it wants to do
it asynchronously in the eager protocol
or if it do it synchronously during the
rendevu protocol and hopefully it will
choose to switch over a sensible point.
Okay, the idea is you shouldn't choose,
NPI can choose. That does have the
unfortunate side effect. You don't know
if NPI send is synchronous or
asynchronous, but it has but the benefit
is NPI can choose to deliver messages
sent NPI send in the way it thinks is
most efficient. However, uh the rendev
protocol which is there back there again
will have a higher latency but
potentially bigger bandwidth. I mean so
we we'll see after the break we'll run a
ping pong code and try and pick out
these things. um in practice.
So what you tend to see okay is that if
you pl the time against the message size
for small messages you will get this um
quick um um delivery relatively constant
time because NPI can just deliver the
whole once but at some point when you
get beyond this eager threshold NPI says
well I I have to now do the rendev
protocol I have to do here's some data
get back to you send it later on and
you'll see this this jump so you see
something a bit like this that for small
messages you get um fast delivery and
above some size which is this eager
limit as it's called which is be maybe a
few tens of kilobytes you'll get a jump
and then you'll get another rise as you
as you have a latency bandwidth model up
here
um
actually um there may be other for very
short messages if you're just sending
one a double precision number eight
bytes Okay, the obvious thing to do is
just to send it on the header. The
header probably has some unused space on
it. So there will be a a third region
which is very small messages. So this
this corresponds to sending a protocol
message and the data at the same time.
This corresponds to the rendevous where
you have to send the protocol message
have an acknowledgement and then send
the data later on. There will possibly
an even faster region here where you
don't even then send send any data. you
just scribble it on the on the um on the
on on the protocol. I think of this as
being like a postcard. Okay, for large
if you're sending large amounts of
information, you have an envelope, you
put the data inside, okay, as a letter,
but for very small messages when you're
on holiday, you just a postcard has the
data on the protocol message.
Everything's on in one place. So there
will be at least three regions very
small messages intermediate. Um, so this
is where so Izzy gets two messages
heaven and dangerous in at the same
time. So I actually this is
I think it is two messages. Yeah, I
think it is a header sent to the receive
Q and the data sent to the buffer space.
But I was that that question always
occur. I need and that is my model. So
Jerry, that is my model. Okay, it
doesn't have to be. You could have
variable length headers in which case an
ego mesh would just be a mesh with a big
header. I don't believe that's what's
done. My understanding is that it's
typically two messages. It's a very good
question and I was actually I was
slightly evading that discussion because
I didn't know the answer and you picked
me up on it. But my model is that it's
two messages. A protocol message into
the receive queue and a data message
into the into the buffer space. Yeah,
that's my belief. Um
um yeah, that's so that's my model. That
that's my model.
Um
and in that case, that's why the very
short message is even faster because it
is actually if you can get the data on
the header, it is one message. Yeah. As
opposed to two. That's my understanding.
Um so again we may have very short
message protocols. Um for very large
messages you can sometimes do direct
memory access. What that means is data
goes straight from the from the sender's
memory to the receivers's memory. So you
may even get a different proc for very
very large messages. However the
overhead of setting this up is very
high. So it's it's it's we may not see
it. But the three regions you should be
able to see when doing a standard
pingpong a very short message
intermediate message very short message
where the data is is put on the header
intermediate where my model is two
messages sent at the same time a header
and the data and and a large message
regime above the tens of kilobytes where
it's a rendevous here's the header get
back to me here's the data and you have
to have this hand shaking
Um I'm coming to the end of the time. So
collectives um what I would say here is
that um the reason that collectives were
like all reduce were uh defined as
single routines at NPI was to allow um
the NPI library to do them efficiently
without you having to do it yourself. So
people spend their lives researching uh
efficient collective operations. You
don't really care how they're done. You
just hope the NPI library does a good
thing. And one important thing here is
that um the collectors don't even have
to be um uh implemented in software with
NPI calls. For example, a modern network
might have a hardware barrier. There
might be a you know a barrier call which
is done in hardware. So on a network
which has a hardware barrier, you would
hope that that NPI library would would
say David wants to do a barrier. I'm not
even going to call NPI. I'm going to
call this special hardware barrier which
exists in this particular network. So,
so and it will use lots and lots and
lots of tricks. So, I mean the main this
is basically saying use collectives when
you can because they will be implemented
efficiently. Often your data access
patterns don't actually map onto
collectives. But that's right.
Hopefully, if I get time to do the final
lecture today, you'll see that for the
the the
use of advanced use of drive data types
can allow you to use collectives when
you might think you might not be able to
do them. Um, that'll become more obvious
when I do. So uh the collectives I'm
just I'm going to go through this quite
quickly but you know a typically good
collectors will a naive implementation
all reduce would be everybody sends
their data to rank zero who ran them up
and broadcast them out sends them out
again that would scale that would be P
messages on P processors it would scale
that would be a disaster good
collectives tend to use things like
binary trees or or whatever and
hopefully the time scales the log of
number of processes Okay. So that you
know that's typically your model
typically most well
collectives well implemented will scale
the log of the number of processes
whereas if you did them naively it would
scale linearly the number of processes
and that's the huge difference because
even on a thousand processes log to a
thousand is 10. So you know using
collectors it already ballpark a 100
times faster from a thousand process.
Um,
people help me with this spike. I So I
So, so I don't really have much
experience of of of of building
NPI libraries myself because I've tended
to always work on large system where
it's pre-built. Um, how can you show us
perform? I think I mean probably most
systems look pretty similar nowadays.
Most systems are Linux shared memory
node with Infinity Band. So, I think
unless you're building something weird,
it would it would be it would work. Um,
that's my guess. Um, I don't actually
know, but that would be my guess. I
think
yeah, that's a good question. I don't
know as I don't have I don't have much
experience building NPI libraries myself
because um I've always used um Yes. So,
so yes. So, that that is why you should
pick up the system libraries.
Absolutely. Yeah, you should pick up the
system libraries. But if you are
building it yourself then I actually
don't know what tweaks and knobs there
are to twiddle and now uh I I have seen
a lot that a lot of things are actually
configurable at runtime. So for example
if open API has a bunch of different
algorithms which you can use for
reductions they're often choosable at
runtime with weird and wonderful
environment variables not at compile
time. So I think maybe to try and
circumvent that problem they make a lot
of stuff configurable at runtime. So
when you build it, you just build it,
but then new experimentation is done at
runtime. Again, that means you'd have to
pick the same parameters. The other
reason why you want it to be
configurable at runtime is that, you
know, it's horses for courses. Some
algorithms might work well for for one
user and not for another depending on
their data patterns. So again, it's a
good question. I think a lot more
configurable at runtime now than it used
to be. Um, so I've just got a pitch for
a binary tree. Okay, there you go. Um,
I won't talk about process topologies.
uh or singlesided.
Um but I will oh
so okay sorry this is the this is the
slide so I'm okay this is the slide that
someone mentioned about you logically
communicator independent communication
domains okay so so communicators a
message you send in one communicator
can't be can't be can't be received in
another so you could use separate
message cues to speed up matching
processes in practice Um
most application codes only use a few
communicators at once you so actually
most implementations use a native. So
what what we're saying is that in
although um in practice okay the
communicator is just another tag in okay
it's different because user tags you can
wild card on them and you but but in
practice the MP implementation will just
basically send and receive messages in
com world basically but the
communicators will be done through
through some special hidden tag if that
makes sense. So, so that is how the MP
will do. It will just be a magic tag uh
which is added on to the normal tag. Um
so, so so so it will not
yeah it will use global sets of cues raw
sends and receives but it will pick up
the correct communicator because the the
protocol message will have some magic
tag attached to it which which reflects
the communicator which was sent from. So
I can't remember who asked that question
but you're right in principle you could
have different cues for each
communicating that would be a good thing
to do possibly but in practice they tend
not to do that.
Um
I'm not going to talk about process or
singlesided because people weren't that
interested in that. So, so there's a
summary a bit over time. There are many
ways of besting NPI communication. Which
one is fastest depends on what NPI
library using, what hardware using, what
operator you're using. Performance port
is therefore really hard. It's very hard
to write an NPI program which is
optimally performant everywhere. My my
advice is always implement lots of
different methods and each time just
test them and pick the best one. You
know, if as I said, if there's 101 ways,
sorry, 100 half a dozen ways to do to do
halo swapping, implement them all and
just have a little and just have a go
the first time you use a new machine and
see which is fastest for you. You know,
that is probably what I would say. You
know there are some hard and fast sorry
there are some general rules which will
help you which are things like post
receives early so that when the send
comes in they will be there in matching
and such like but it's very hard to um
it's very hard to to to be definitive
but again um
and again I have a I have a halo swap
benchmark which will run sometime today
which does halo swapping in a six or
seven different ways and you can see
which one's faster. this.
Okay, I've overrun slightly. What we're
going to do, we'll come come back after
half 12. Um the the idea will be if I
can find my
window.
Stop that.
weird is going on here. Um
hopefully you're seeing my window now.
Yes. So we'll come back at have lunch to
a half one go um 55 minutes at least and
then we're going to run um uh a a
pointto-oint benchmark a simple ping
pong but hopefully we'll now be able to
actually understand the results and then
I'll give a general talk on on how you
can yeah things you might want to
improve on your NPI program. Um and then
uh yeah that's the plan for this
afternoon. So I'll see I'll see you guys
again at um half
one which is a practical till two and
then the next lecture is two. We'll be
back at half one.